Hello.
Welcome to session 434,
Cocoa Performance Techniques.
My name is Troy Stephens.
I'm a software engineer in the
Cocoa Frameworks group at Apple.
And I'm here today to talk to you
about performance and optimization,
specifically as they apply to developing
Cocoa applications on Mac OS X.
Now, as we all probably know,
performance is work and diligence.
But it can also be
exciting and rewarding.
It can pay off in applications
that your users want to use.
If there's one thing that users love,
it's a well-optimized,
responsive application,
one that not only empowers them
to do something of interest,
but is ready to respond to their
requests and provide feedback with
quick turnaround to interact with
them in a way that is responsive.
So optimization.
[Transcript missing]
So turnaround is part of it.
And one thing that you want to do is
figure out where the opportunities for
optimization in your application lie.
And how do you do that?
How do we figure out where to do things?
Well, it's partly a matter of metrics,
of using measurement techniques
and measurement tools.
It's partly a matter of having
some general ideas about
optimization that may apply.
You may have brought these from other
platforms that you've worked on.
And it's partly a matter of knowing the
frameworks that you're working with and
the platform that you're working with,
knowing the various
capabilities that it provides,
their performance characteristics,
and so forth.
So that's what I want to
talk to you about today.
The other issues,
the platform-independent
issues about performance,
are easily covered elsewhere.
They're comprehensively
covered elsewhere.
Today I want to talk
specifically about Cocoa.
And in particular,
I'll try to point out to you some
common performance techniques,
some issues that you may
encounter commonly as you're
developing Cocoa applications,
things lots of people run into.
I'll try to point out some
API usage techniques and recommended
usage patterns that you can
use to help improve performance.
And we'll also look at alternative ways,
different ways that Cocoa provides a
variety of ways to perform a particular
task that give you the opportunity to
choose the way that is most conducive
to getting the best performance.
So as prerequisites for this talk,
I assume only that you have some
general experience developing in Cocoa,
some familiarity, more or less,
with the various APIs and classes
and capabilities that it provides.
And if you have some general knowledge
of performance techniques that
you've brought from another platform,
that could be helpful too,
but it's not strictly required.
So first,
before we dive into the Cocoa specifics,
I want to cover some general concepts,
just to get us into the right mindset
for thinking about optimization.
There's a lot of wisdom that's
been accumulated from various other
platforms that we all have worked on.
Some things about
performance are constants,
and we can learn from that.
So one of the most important
things about performance tuning
is it involves trade-offs,
some give and take.
On the one hand,
you have this ideal of achieving high
performance in your applications,
creating a responsive application.
But there are a number of various
areas in which you may need to
give a little and compromise.
There are trade-offs involved.
One of those trade-offs
is resource usage.
A common technique for producing
higher performance is rather
than recalculating results,
say caching it.
You use a little more resource,
keep some block of memory around,
and reuse that.
You're trading memory for
performance in that case.
There are lots of other examples of
that with other types of resources.
Engineering time is always at a premium.
There's never enough of it.
And there are any number of
aspects of your application
that you can spend time tuning.
You don't want to spend time optimizing
every little bit of your application,
because in many cases
that can be premature,
and it can lead to more
complex code that's just
completely unwieldy to maintain.
So since engineering time
is a limited resource,
you need to really focus in on where
you'll get the most benefit from the
performance optimizations you're doing.
Convenience and simplicity.
A lot of times, though not always,
the most convenient way to do
something is not always the way that is
conducive to the highest performance.
So sometimes you have to make your code
a little more complicated to optimize
it for the special case that it's really
going to have to handle so that you
can get maximum performance out of it.
Loose coupling, flexibility to change.
These are the hallmarks of
object-oriented programming.
And to some extent,
you can achieve performance while
still retaining some loose coupling.
But the essence of programming
and developing an application is,
in some sense, making assumptions,
defining the assumptions
of your problem domain.
So often, the more assumptions you deny
yourself the ability to make,
the more general your code is,
and the fewer the optimization
opportunities you're
really taking advantage of.
So sometimes you have to give up
a little flexibility in order to
hardwire your code for the fastest
path for the best performance.
Lastly, strict correctness and safety.
Almost all the time,
you want to make sure no matter what your
code is correct and does the right thing.
Only a few cases can you actually
get away with approximating.
But there are some cases,
such as when you're drawing.
If you're drawing something
that doesn't need to be exact,
that maybe speed is more important,
you can approximate in cases like that.
And also, in terms of safety,
if you're developing generic code,
let's say,
that you're going to put in a framework,
and you don't know who's
going to use it yet.
It might be used by some unknown
application or applications.
You might not know whether those
applications will need those objects
that you're providing to be thread safe,
let's say.
So if you have to provide
locking and thread safety,
that's a whole other burden
that can affect performance.
You have to be able to balance
the desire for performance against
these other competing demands.
So there are some general recommendations
we can make about performance.
One of the most important things
that you can do is to choose a
scalable application architecture.
Think about the ways that your
application is going to be used.
Try to anticipate the numbers
of objects that your application
is going to have to deal with.
And choose appropriate
algorithms and data structures.
On any platform,
this can make a huge difference
in how your application performs.
Also, when you're working
with the framework APIs,
don't fight the framework.
Try to leverage as much as possible
what the framework provides.
And in terms of Cocoa in particular,
where Cocoa provides a
facility to do something,
it's in many ways to your advantage
to leverage that facility to its
maximum capability and use it,
because then you have the benefit of
a whole team of frameworks engineers
at Apple who are constantly making
not only performance improvements,
but also enhancements and functionality.
And you get to inherit
all of that for free.
Also, wherever possible,
when you're defining your own internal
data structures and your own objects,
try to use API-compatible
types where possible.
You notice, for example, in APKID APIs,
we largely use NSArray.
I don't think we have any APIs,
maybe a few, that use NSSets.
So if you use a lot of sets, let's say,
for example, in your code,
in your model code,
you may find you have to do a
lot of conversions between your
internal representation and what
the framework expects every time
you make a message send that uses
some particular type of data.
So try to avoid that sort of
type impedance mismatch by
using API-compatible types.
And you can do that with a lot
of other types where you can.
Also, try to keep in mind
easily overlooked costs,
things like heap allocations,
including allocating and
deallocating objects.
Heap operations do take some time.
There's some overhead involved in that.
We don't normally think about that.
We kind of think that
it's just kind of magic.
We ask for some memory
and get it for free.
Also, keep in mind indeterminate
time operations,
particularly synchronous operations,
such as synchronous file
system and network operations,
things where your application is going
to block for a fair amount of time.
You don't want to freeze
up your user interface,
obviously,
while the user is waiting for some file
system or network access to happen.
So if you have things like
that that may block for an
unpredictable amount of time,
try to make those asynchronous.
And we'll look at techniques
for doing things like that.
Consider caching expensive results,
where that may help.
If you have something that you do,
that you compute, that you draw,
that may take a lot of time and
that you may reuse many times
before you have to change it again,
it may pay off to cache it.
Keep in mind at the same time that
it may not pay off to cache it.
If the framework, say AppKit,
is already doing some caching for you and
you add your own caching on top of that,
you may find that there's not a net win,
that you've actually added just
another layer of extra code that
doesn't necessarily have any effect.
So you want to measure to see
whether the caching actually helps.
But in general,
caching can be a useful technique.
Also, lastly, consider deferring
operations when you can.
And this is a good one.
This is an interesting
and powerful technique,
and so I'll go into a little more detail.
Think about deferring operations.
The benefits of deferring
operations include not having,
obviously, not having to perform an
operation immediately.
If you don't need the result right away,
well, maybe you don't have to perform
the operation right away.
Maybe you just need to
make a note somewhere that,
hey, I need to compute this later.
You obviously then don't incur the
cost of the operation right now.
And if you have a number of requests,
a series of requests,
that come in maybe from
different parts of the system
to perform that given operation,
but they don't need the, again,
don't need the result immediately,
you may be able to save doing
that operation several times
by coalescing those requests,
just setting that flag.
And every time you set that flag, well,
it's a constant time operation,
and it's really cheap.
And then later,
when you actually need the result,
you can go back and say, oh,
I need to compute this.
And there you've got it,
and you only compute it once
instead of several times.
Lastly, if you're really lucky,
you may never have to incur
the cost of the operation at
all if the result isn't needed.
So try to think as you're
coding about whether what you're
computing really needs to be done.
Is this really necessary?
Right now.
Now, on the flip side,
one of the costs of this
is that when you do ask,
when some part of the application
does ask for the result later,
it's not going to be there ready to go.
The computation has to be done then.
So obviously,
you want to use some discretion
in applying this technique,
but it is very useful and powerful.
We use it, for example,
in the app kit when we're drawing views.
You're familiar probably
with the set needs display
mechanism that we recommend.
Rather than asking views to
display themselves immediately,
you tell them, hey,
you're dirty in this area.
You're going to need to draw here.
And you can have potentially many
requests to mark different parts
of the view dirty as needing
display at some later point.
And all that drawing doesn't
happen normally until you
get back to the run loop,
to the top of the run loop.
And then we look and say, oh,
it's part of the window dirty.
Yeah, OK, we've got to redraw the parts
of the window that are dirty.
But we can do it all at once.
And so we can have thousands of requests
to dirty different parts of the window
satisfied by a single drawing pass.
Similarly, in your own applications,
if you break your
application into components,
if you do initialization in stages,
that can be a useful way to improve
performance by deferring results,
operations, till later.
Lastly,
some other things to keep in mind.
Some of the techniques
that I recommend here,
or point out to you rather,
may not be appropriate
in certain situations,
may actually degrade performance.
And the only way you can really know,
although our intuition as
engineers is very useful,
the only way you can really know
whether an attempted optimization has
had a positive effect is to measure.
And remember to not just measure after,
but measure before,
so you have something to compare with.
That's the only way to
really know whether you've
made things better or worse.
And often the result is surprising.
So along these lines,
we provide some very powerful
tools for you to use,
including Shark,
which is covered in another session.
Any of you who are here right
now and not in the Shark session,
I recommend looking into
Shark on your own later.
It's a very powerful tool,
enables you to sample not
just your application,
but performance of the entire
system while your app is running.
Also, if you happen to be using OpenGL,
OpenGL Profiler is a tremendously
powerful tool in getting better.
So be aware of these tools and use
them to measure to find out what's
really going on in your apps.
So OK, now we're ready to get-- we're
in the right frame of mind.
We're ready to get into
Cocoa in particular.
I'm going to divide the rest of
the talk into two general parts.
First,
we'll look at optimization techniques
and API usage techniques that apply
to the APIs that AppKit provides.
And then we're going to dive deeper and
look at some foundation-related issues.
So first, the AppKit-related stuff,
things that I refer to
as user interface issues.
and a number of techniques
I want to cover with you today,
including reducing launch time,
taking long operations,
as I was saying earlier,
making them asynchronous,
optimizing drawing and
scrolling in various ways,
and so forth.
So what about reducing launch time?
This isn't exactly, maybe strictly,
an optimization technique.
This is a matter more of
deferring operations until later.
You can actually use
both techniques here.
Remember that the user's
experience of using your app
begins with launching the app.
The sooner your application
can be ready to go,
the happier your user is going to be.
So there are a number of ways
you can reduce launch time.
Obviously,
brute force-- if there are things
that you do at launch time and you
can optimize them to run faster,
well, obviously, that's one way to do it.
If you can defer loading of data,
initializing different subsystems--
if your app has a lot of different
subsystems and maybe your user isn't
going to touch them immediately,
certain features they may not use even in
the session of launching the application,
using it,
and quitting it-- you can actually
defer initialization of those
subsystems if it's costly until later.
And one technique you
can use for doing this,
you can use nib files
and plug-in bundles.
These are two very powerful
capabilities and facilities that
Cocoa provides for factoring your
user interface and your code.
You can actually dynamically
load code in bundles at runtime.
You can factor your application into
components that are loaded in as needed.
And that also, incidentally,
provides a way for other developers to
be able to extend your applications,
potentially.
So plug-ins are great.
Where you perform your
initialization may be important.
You all know Awake from Nib--
this is our friend-- when we
instantiate objects in Nib files,
and we load those Nib files at runtime,
Awake from Nib is sent to every
object at a stage after all of
the objects' interconnections,
as were made in the Nib,
have been established.
And the network of objects is intact.
They're ready to go and wired up.
That's usually a very good and convenient
time to perform initialization.
One thing about that is that
Awake from Nib is usually sent,
say, for your main menu Nib,
or for your document Nib,
if you're writing a document-based app.
That's sent before the
UI is brought on screen.
So any initialization that you do
there is going to make the user wait,
potentially, if it takes a long time.
A lesser-known place to perform
initialization that's very useful
is ApplicationDidFinishLaunching.
This is a message that is sent
either to the application's delegate,
if it has one, or to any observer,
any object that registers as an observer
of the NSApplicationDidFinishLaunching
notification.
It is sent significantly after
the UI is already on screen,
after any files that were
requested to be open when the app
was launched have been opened,
and the run loop is ready
to begin handling events.
Your app is ready to go.
So if there's initialization
operations you can perform later
at ApplicationDidFinishLaunching,
that's a useful place to hook in.
What about long blocking operations
that may block your user interface?
Remember, in a Cocoa application,
by default, unless you do otherwise,
you basically have one thread on which
everything happens-- your event handling,
your drawing,
any processing that your application
does when I click this button over here,
and so forth.
And so any long synchronous operation
that you perform is performed
on the main thread and blocks
your user interface normally.
So there are a couple of
ways to deal with this.
We can make the operation take less time,
again, obviously.
Or you can use any of various
techniques to move the
operation into the background.
And a few of the facilities
that we provide for doing this
are asynchronous notifications,
which are also sometimes
called idle timers,
run loop observers, and threads.
Let's look at those in some detail.
Asynchronous notifications are
simply notifications that are
added to a notification queue.
They are enqueued with the
posting style of post when idle.
These notifications are handled
when the run loop figures out that
the application is sitting idle
and there's time to do something.
It's just sitting there spinning,
waiting for something
interesting to happen.
Optionally, you can ask for such
notifications to be coalesced.
So if there are a number of different
places you want to post them from to
stimulate this idle activity to happen,
whatever activity you've designated to
happen in response to the notification,
you can have them coalesced
either on name or on the
notification sender on the poster.
Another powerful technique that exists
actually in core foundation-- remember,
you can use core foundation from your
Cocoa apps-- is the CFRunLoop observer.
And what this lets you do is
hook into not just your run loop,
but at the idle time point,
but at any point you want, really.
And we have a number of different
options here on entry to the run loop,
before timers are handled, and so forth.
So you can hook in-- actually,
this is a mask.
So you can specify several different
places that you want to hook in.
And it's basically a mechanism for you
to provide a callback function that
will be called when the run loop reaches
these various stages of processing.
And then you can do
whatever you want there.
Well,
these are two very powerful techniques.
But obviously, they're still doing their
processing on the main thread.
They're maybe a little more friendly
to responsiveness of the application,
because they're letting you do
things sort of when the application
figures out that it's idle.
And if you don't do your
operations in two big chunks,
then you're OK.
But what if you have a long operation,
and there's no two ways about it?
You've got to find another way to do it,
and keep it from disturbing your UI.
Another possibility is to
use a background thread.
spin off another thread.
This is supported through
the NSThread class,
and in particular,
is very easy to do in Cocoa.
The hard part, as with multi-threaded
programming on any platform,
is getting synchronization right
and synchronizing object accesses
and getting thread safety.
But spinning off the thread is very easy.
NSThread provides the detached
new thread selector method.
You specify a message
that you want to send,
the target object.
You can optionally specify a
parameter object to be passed in.
And then here we have a method
that basically is the thread.
It becomes the thread.
When the thread is spun off,
that method begins execution,
and that method can run
forever if it expects to exist,
if it wants to exist for
the lifetime of the app,
or it can quit out if
it's done processing,
and then that terminates the thread.
And one thing that you want to do here
is put an auto-release pool in there so
that any objects that you auto-release
during the course of processing in your
background thread do get cleaned up.
Otherwise, you're going to get
messages in the console.
When you're just doing
main thread programming,
you get an auto-release pool for free
that's automatically provided for you.
So we'll see that again.
So as I said,
the main thing to do when you are
doing multi-threaded programming,
you have to make sure that no
two threads are simultaneously
accessing and especially trying
to mutate a given object.
We provide locking semantics for that.
And another thing that you need
to do when you're doing the
processing in a background thread,
obviously your main thread at
some point wants to know about,
well,
what were the results of that processing?
They usually affect
something on the main thread,
maybe some UI.
And you need a way to communicate
back to your main thread what the
results of that processing was and
maybe even some intermediate results.
So there are various ways to do that.
The easiest way to do it is to use
performSelector on main thread.
This is a method that's defined
in a category on NSObject.
You'll find it's hidden
away in nsthread.h.
If you don't know about it,
this is a great, powerful method.
And what it enables you to do is not
just send a message to the main thread,
but it schedules your message
so that it's performed.
It doesn't interrupt the
main thread while it's in the
middle of doing something else.
And so you can pass objects across
thread boundaries fairly safely.
So this is interesting stuff.
And to go into this further,
let's see what we have
cooking on demo one.
So here I have a document-based
application that I call Scrapbook.
And it's fairly simple.
Got my model view
controller divisions here.
Basically what it does is it gives
you a page on which you're able
to arrange a number of photos.
And you have a page view that you
can use to see that and visualize it.
So let's see.
I've launched the application.
is a clean new document.
Let's drag some pictures in.
And it loads them up,
and we can drag them
around and move them.
Simple document-based application.
And this is a custom NS view that
I simply wrote that displays the
photos when it's asked to draw.
Hi, everyone.
I'm Troy Stephens.
I'm the founder of
Cocoa Performance Techniques.
It's loading it.
Oh, there it goes.
Well, that took a little while.
Let's try that again.
Drag the document down.
It took a few seconds to do it.
Now we're running, fortunately,
on a dual-proc 2 gigahertz G5 here,
but you can imagine easily on
a machine that's more memory
constrained or that's slower that
this could take a lot more time.
And especially if we only
have two dozen photos here,
that's not a whole lot.
So how could we make this a more
satisfying experience for the user?
How can we make it so that the
document comes up more immediately?
Sure we can.
And in fact,
here we have a multi-threaded
version of Scrapbook that's
not much more complicated.
And when I run it--
[Transcript missing]
Here we go.
And we just display a placeholder
image in place of each image until
the image arrives on the main thread.
And if I do this fast enough,
I can even grab the window,
start resizing and interacting with
it while the images are still loading.
So let's look at the code for that.
It's fairly simple.
Any venture into multi-threaded
programming comes with certain warnings
about how complicated it can be to get
it right and to not have your app crash.
But this is, in fact,
not very complicated.
I've got a background bitmap loader
class that's simply a subclass
of NSObject that I created here.
It's got as its attributes a
path queue that keeps track of--
this is basically its to-do list.
These are the paths of the image
files that I'm supposed to load.
We've got a lock that we use to
ensure safe access to the path queue.
So any time some code
accesses the path queue,
it takes this lock and then
releases the lock when it's done.
I've got a simple flag here to keep
track of whether the thread is running,
because I don't start it immediately
when I create the object.
And now we've got a delegate here,
which is our connection back to
the object on the main thread.
In this case,
I've chosen the document object
as the object that receives
the images as they're loaded.
So you create this
object with a delegate.
You can set its delegate.
And when you want to load an image,
we create one instance of
the background bitmap loader.
When we want to load an image,
we send this request
bitmap at path message,
send it the path, and that returns
immediately to the caller,
has stuck the path in the queue already,
and it's on its to-do
list for images to load.
We also wanted to have a cancel all
requests message that I can send
so that if we close the document,
let's say,
before all the images are done loading,
we want to be able to safely abort out
of this so that we're not messaging
back to a non-existent document object.
And in the implementation--
The interesting methods here,
request bitmap at path.
As I said, we take the lock on the path
queue before we manipulate it.
We add the object,
add the path to the path queue.
I actually make a copy
here to be completely safe.
The interesting methods here,
request bitmap at path.
As I said, we take the lock on the path
queue before we manipulate it.
We add the object,
add the path to the path queue.
I actually make a copy
here to be completely safe.
Similarly, for later,
when we want to cancel all requests,
all we do is take the lock,
drain the queue of all the
paths that have been queued up,
and release the lock.
So this is the workhorse
method of the thread,
load queued images.
We create an auto-release pool
here to make sure auto-released
objects are automatically taken
care of once the method exits.
And then I've got a loop here where
I basically go until I run out of paths.
Each time through the loop,
I look and see if I have
another path to process.
I've got to take the lock on the
path queue before I touch it.
I grab the next path in the queue,
remove it, and unlock the queue,
because I'm done with the queue.
So the main thread is now
free to add requests to it.
And now, if I've got a path,
if the queue isn't empty now,
I go ahead and basically load my
bitmap image rep using NSDatas in
it with contents of file,
and then NSBitmapImageReps
in it with data.
I check whether I still have a delegate,
and whether the delegate knows
how to handle this message.
And I message it back by
sending it-- because I don't
want to just send it the image.
It's going to get the image and say,
well, yeah, OK, which image is that?
I want to send it also
the path to the image.
So I just wrap those up in a dictionary.
Let's see.
I need some code wrap here.
All right.
Yes, I mean now.
Okay, that's much better.
So I create a dictionary.
And the only sort of unusual thing to
notice here that I'm doing is in terms
of the normal object ownership rules,
usually you hand something off to another
method and you want to auto-release
it so that you've discharged yourself
of responsibility for releasing it.
But when you're passing an
object across thread boundaries,
you kind of want to make sure that
that object's still going to be around
by the time the other thread grabs
hold of it and retains it and so forth.
So I'm sidestepping the usual rules
and I'm alloc-initing this dictionary
and I'm passing it across using
perform selector on main thread.
I tell the object on the main thread,
the delegate,
the bitmap has been loaded and
here's the dictionary that has
the path and the bitmap itself.
Wait until done basically says return
immediately as soon as you register this
message to be sent on the main thread.
Just come back immediately.
It's safe to do because I've
already made the bitmap info.
It's safe to do.
It's got a retain count of one.
It's going to stick around until the
main thread takes responsibility for it.
And then that's it.
Once I've handed off,
I can let go of the bitmap, the data,
and the path.
And I'm also using an inner
auto-release pool here,
because I may be loading
hundreds of images.
This is an important point when you're
writing a secondary thread method,
is that I'm loading
potentially many images.
I don't know how many.
It could be hundreds.
It could be thousands.
And if I'm auto-releasing things,
I could end up filling up memory
with all these images that have been
handed off and are still sitting
there waiting to be auto-released.
So what I want to do is clean up
each time through the iteration.
You don't necessarily have to do
this every time through an iteration.
You might,
if you're doing 10,000 iterations,
do 100 iterations of 100 and
have an inner auto-release
pool only in the inner loop.
But basically, every time we hit this
inner pool release,
we're going to clean up any
auto-released objects that were
created during the course of that loop.
So that's the most
interesting part of it.
In the photo object itself,
where we used to load
the image immediately,
we simply load a placeholder image
that's small and quick to load,
and it's only loaded once because
it's part of our resources.
And in the page view itself--
Oops, I'm sorry,
in the document class itself,
we have the bitmap loaded method
that receives this dictionary.
This is the other side of the gate,
and this receives the dictionary
passed off by the secondary thread.
It's handed off to us.
We get the path and the photo
that are in the dictionary.
And basically all we have to do here
is identify the photo model object that
that image belongs to and assign it.
And then we tell the page view, hey,
you've got to redisplay this photo
because something's changed about it.
And that's that.
We've got a multi-threaded
version of our scrapbook app
without a whole lot of effort.
Let's go back to the slides if we could.
Is this going to be a wait-and-fill?
It will be eventually.
So what are some other techniques
you can use that relate to
AppKit components and facilities?
[Transcript missing]
Here's a real simple, cheap optimization.
This is an easy one-liner you
can add to your custom views.
And the reason for the existence
of the isOpaque method,
I should point out, is that by default,
AppKit cannot assume that a view
will draw with complete opaque
coverage of its background.
Our Aqua widgets are often
non-rectangular in shape.
They have nice rounded
corners and so forth.
So this is less an issue of
transparency as of coverage.
Basically, this is saying,
if I'm not opaque,
if I'm a custom view and I'm not opaque,
I'm saying that I may need some of the
background provided by the views higher
up than me and the window background
to show through to complete my drawing.
I only draw some stuff on top of that.
If you don't need the
background to show through,
declare yourself to be opaque.
This saves AppKit from drawing
all the stuff behind your view.
If you've got this huge document view in
particular that's covering your window,
if you don't make it opaque,
we're going to think, OK,
we've got to draw the
window background behind it.
OK, now we've got to draw your view.
We don't know that you're covering it.
We don't know what you're
doing in your draw rect.
So be opaque when you can.
Also,
when your draw rect method is called,
draw minimally.
Try to draw only what
we're asking you to draw.
The simplest first-level optimization
you can do is simply use and observe
the single rectangle parameter
that is passed to draw rect that
tells you basically a bounding
box on the area that needs display.
And you can use NS intersect rect,
for example,
to test against that bounding box.
If you have a number of objects,
for example, here,
drawable things that we
need to draw in our view,
this is a common case.
For each object,
before I go to the trouble of drawing it,
which may be costly,
see if its bounding box intersects
the bounding box that I've been given.
If not, don't bother drawing.
On Panther and Tiger,
you can further constrain
drawing beyond that.
Beginning in Panther,
we've been keeping a more detailed
accounting than we used to of specific
regions within a view that need drawing.
We can give you, if you ask for it,
a list of rectangles that are
non-overlapping that specify
the area that needs to be drawn.
So you can get this directly
using the getRectsBeingDrawnCount
method if you want direct
access to that rectangle list.
And if you use those Rects,
you can use the parameter to draw Rect.
You can still use that as a bounding
box to do trivial rejection testing.
You can first check your objects
against that bounding box.
If they lie within it, OK, well,
maybe they're in this
list of Rects somewhere.
Maybe they intersect that list
of Rects and need drawing.
Alternatively, in the common case,
like we had before on the previous slide,
where you're just iterating over
a list of things to be drawn,
you just want to test each
of those things in sequence
and not do anything fancy.
You can use needsToDrawRect,
which was a new method
provided in Panther,
that will do all the testing
against this list of Rects for you.
It will do the trivial rejection
test against the bounding box.
So use that.
That's sort of the more modern
alternative to NSIntersectsRect
that we have in this code sample.
If you're doing Panther and later,
you can use that.
What about speeding up window resizing?
Window resizing, obviously,
is partly dependent on view drawing.
Window resizing is something that
heavily exercises view drawing.
When the user grabs a corner of your
resizable window and starts dragging it,
basically, at the worst case,
we have to redraw the entire
window for every iteration,
every step of that drag.
So if it takes your
window longer to draw,
you have slower updates,
then your resize is going to chunk along.
On the other hand,
if you make the updates
shorter and faster,
we get a higher frame rate,
a much more fluid motion,
and a much more satisfying
user experience.
So obviously,
anything you can do to optimize
view drawing will also give
you a payoff in window resize.
There are also some further things
you can do specifically for the case
where a window is being resized.
Not just drawing your views more quickly,
but preserving view
content wherever possible.
One thing you can do that's
been around for a long time
is the concept of live resize,
I think since the beginning of Cocoa.
A view, when it's drawing itself,
can check whether it's being drawn in the
middle of a window resize using the in
live resize message that's highlighted
in orange up at the top there.
If you are in live resize,
you may want to take advantage of the
opportunity to do some less expensive
drawing than you might otherwise do.
Because you're deciding, hey,
if I'm just going to be drawing a
whole bunch repeatedly real fast,
maybe I don't need to be pixel exact.
Maybe I can take a cheaper,
faster route and trade some
accuracy for performance,
let's say.
We also have view will start live resize
and view did end live resize are two
methods that you can override to prepare
to enter live resize mode and prepare to
do any cleanup you need to do after exit.
So those are a couple of additional
hooks that you get before you're that
all views get this message sent to them
before the window starts going into
live resize and then after it ends.
So if you need to do setup or cleanup,
that's where you would do it.
In addition, on Tiger,
we've been doing some further
optimizations to allow Windows to
preserve content when they're resizing.
One thing you'll notice
when you resize a window,
oftentimes a lot of the
pixels aren't really changing.
They don't need to be redrawn,
rerendered.
And to help support that,
we've added new API in
Tiger on NSWindow and NSView.
A window has the capability to be
put in a mode where it preserves
its content during live resize,
and a view that is savvy about this
mechanism can implement certain
functionality to help support it,
to make it possible.
This is something that propagates
down the view hierarchy.
So in order for a view to
take advantage of this,
all of its super views have to be clued
in and know how to use this mechanism.
And we're working now actively
to optimize the various views,
especially the container views in
AppKit that will help support this.
And an example of how you would use this,
if you have a custom view class, My View,
You override the preserves
content during live resize method.
This is a simple thing like isOpake.
You're just returning a bool to say, hey,
I support this feature.
I'm clued in.
I'm in the know.
And I know what to do to help
support this live resize mode.
Then you override, usually, setFrameSize.
Or if you have some other tile method,
sometimes you'll override a
different method to do this.
But usually,
setFrameSize is a good point to do this.
You hook in.
You pass on the message to
super first to do whatever
normally would need to be done.
And then in addition,
you can check whether
you're in live resize mode.
This is, again,
that in live resize message.
If we are in live resize,
then what we become
responsible for doing,
if we have declared that
we support this feature,
is dirtying the parts of myself,
of the view, that will need to be redrawn
to accommodate the new size.
Usually,
when you're redrawing in a window,
if your view's content is pinned to
the upper left corner of the window,
which is the case that
we support right now,
then usually you have sort of
an L-shaped update region on the
right-hand side and the bottom side as
the user is resizing the view larger.
So you have these two strips
that need to be drawn.
And in fact, AppKit computes these and
figures them out for you.
So all you really need to do at this
point is get the rectangles from
AppKit-- and we have this method--
getRectsExposedDuringLiveResize,
count.
And you get back the count
of the number of rects,
and you get back the rectangles.
It's guaranteed to be never
more than four rectangles.
And then you can iterate over
that list of rectangles and mark
yourself dirty in those areas.
So this is something that you
do only during live resize.
When we're not in live resize,
we simply do a full set needs display to
require the entire view to be redrawn.
So that's kind of not
so interesting in code.
Let's look at a demo
and see how this works.
So I've got my old scrapbook app here.
And one of the things you may have
noticed as I started resizing my view is,
boy, it's really chunking along there.
I mean, that's just too slow.
Now, to be completely honest in
disclosing what I'm doing here,
I'm not exactly trying hard to be very
smart about the drawing I'm doing.
We've only got two dozen photos up here.
But what I'm doing is,
these are full-size images in memory.
And I'm scaling them down
every time I draw them.
So I'm doing sort of an expensive,
unnecessary operation.
If I really wanted to make this fast,
one of the things I might do is
resample the images as they're
loaded down to thumbnail size,
since that's all I'm drawing them as.
I don't need the full detail.
But you could suppose that you
have some other objects that are
complex and expensive to draw.
So this is just kind of embarrassing.
On a dual-proc G5,
we shouldn't be chunking along this slow.
And in fact, if we run Quartz debug,
This is a useful feature for
gross display speed measurement.
If you're not familiar with it,
there is a frame meter in Quartz Debug
that's available from the Tools menu.
Show frame meter.
And you can use it as you-- tells you
basically your number of frames per
second on the red gauge there as you
move windows around and as you resize.
And if we start measuring this,
just sort of informally
dragging it around.
I'm not even breaking 10
frames a second there.
This is really embarrassing.
So what can we do about this?
Start by dragging
OK Scrapbook to the trash.
And luckily, I made a copy of it first,
and we've got this better scrapbook.
And what I've done in my page view
This is my custom document view class.
I have overridden, just as I said,
preserves content during live resize.
I've got an IVAR for this setting
so that I can show it in the demo,
but basically we'd always
return yes if we know that we
want to support this feature.
And then in set frame size,
just as I showed you,
this is almost an identical snapshot
of the code that was on the slide.
We figure out if this option
is turned on for the demo.
OK, yeah, we want to preserve content.
If we do want to do that,
we check whether we're in live resize.
And just as a paranoia check,
I checked whether we actually
support this message in NSVUE in
case I was running this on Panther.
Remember,
you can do these kinds of checks
so that you can take advantage of
a feature only if you're running
on the newer version of the system.
We get the rectangles being exposed.
We mark them as needing display.
And let's see if that was even worth
all that trouble of two methods.
"So we've got the application here,
drag the album in,
we've got our background
image loading happening,
and
So again, slow before.
If I go here and turn on preserving
content during live resize--
Look at that.
That's just silky smooth now.
We go up to 60 frames a second.
So that was significant in this case.
And in fact, while we're at it,
before we leave the demo machine,
let's look at another
optimization that I put in there.
So we've got preserving content,
but supposing also that you just want
to take advantage of in-library size,
as I was saying,
to just do simpler drawing.
I've gone to an extreme here.
And I've got a mode where
I can have my view just draw
the photos as simple outlines,
just real simple stroked
boxes during live resize mode.
I enable that optimization,
and as soon as I-- things are
normal when I'm just dragging things
around-- but as soon as I grab the
window corner and start to resize,
everything changes to boxes.
And I can resize all I want.
Obviously,
this is extremely cheap drawing,
so I could be on any old machine.
Even if I'm on a limited memory
iBook or something like that,
this would be very fast.
And this technique is usable way
back on earlier versions of OS X.
So you probably wouldn't
want to go to this extreme.
I'm sort of doing it to make a point
that you can do very different drawing,
entirely different drawing if you want,
or you can do somewhat similar
drawing is the more likely case,
that is somehow less expensive
and approximate in some way
while you're in live resize mode.
So basically, you can do anything
you want in this mode.
And what I've done-- to
implement this is fairly simple.
There we go.
Here we have the draw rec method.
And I guess we didn't
look at this before.
I'm doing some of the other
optimizations I recommended.
We're getting a list of recs
that we're drawing so that when
we go to do our background fill,
we can only fill that list of recs
instead of trying to fill the whole view.
We do clip for you when we're drawing
just specific areas of the view.
So even if you don't
obey that list of recs,
even if you just look at the bounding box
or just try to draw all over the view,
we will clip your drawing just to the
area that drawing is being requested in.
But you still save something by
not even issuing those drawing
commands in the first place
when you have a choice about it.
So we're drawing the background
fill using that list of recs.
And the interesting part here--
is if I have this Draw as Outlines
in Live Resize mode enabled,
and we're in Live Resize mode,
then instead of drawing the whole photo,
I'll just get the frame of the photo,
And I'll just use BezierPath to stroke
erect and white where it would be.
And that's pretty much all we have to do.
The only other thing that I need
to add is in view will start live
resize and view did end live resize,
I need to tell the view
to redisplay itself.
Because when I grab that corner of
the window and I start dragging,
if I don't do this,
then I will get the complete
photo drawing on the one hand.
And then as I start dragging,
new stuff that appears
will be drawn and outlined.
And that looks kind of
inconsistent and weird.
And same thing when you're
exiting live resize mode.
You want to redisplay the whole view
at that point to go back into the
old mode and reflect the change.
So OK, if we could go back to slides,
please.
Thank you.
Scrolling-- not a whole
lot to say about scrolling,
except that obviously it hinges
somewhat on view drawing performance.
And in some sense,
it's related a bit to window drawing,
window resize performance,
because it exercises
view drawing intensively.
So if you have a document view that
you're going to put in a scroll view,
and you want your scrolling
to be smooth and fluid,
one thing you can do is make sure
that your document view uses these
facilities that I pointed out earlier,
and can efficiently draw
small bands of its content.
Because those are the kinds of
requests that you're likely to get
during a scrolling operation-- lots
of small little incremental scrolls,
where you just have to
draw a little strip.
And the more efficiently
you can determine,
oh, I don't need to draw this,
I don't need to draw that,
all this other stuff
that's not in that strip,
the more quickly you can draw and
the smoother your scrolling will be.
Another little feature of
Scroll View and Clip View to be aware of,
by default they are opaque.
They are set to draw an opaque
background behind the document view.
So if the Clip View area is sized
bigger than the document view,
you will get opaque
fill all around there.
For best performance, leave it that way,
unless you really,
really want that outside margin
area to show through to the
views and the window behind.
Because it does significantly impact
drawing performance and scrolling
performance within the Scroll View.
So that feature is there to use it.
Be aware that that has
a performance cost.
String drawing,
we provide very convenient
methods as categories on NSString.
You can draw a string at any point
or within a bounding rectangle and
supply a dictionary of text attributes,
and we'll just do that for you.
I mean that's very little
work to draw a string.
That's a one-liner, right?
It's very convenient.
But note that when you invoke
these methods to do this
convenient string drawing,
what we have to do under the
hood to implement that is
potentially set up the text system,
wire together the various objects.
If you've worked with
the Cocoa text system,
you know there's a lot of
different things involved,
text containers, layout manager,
and the text view itself and so forth.
So we've got to figure out how
to lay out the glyphs for the
string that you've given us,
and then we've got to do the actual
rasterization or drawing of the glyphs.
This is a lot of stuff
going on under the hood.
Now this is an area that's
being actively optimized.
We do provide some degree of caching.
Obviously,
it's sort of a general caching.
We can't know what the behaviors of
your applications will be because
every application is different.
But we do attempt to avoid these costs.
So you should see this
improving on Panther and Tiger.
This is continuing to evolve.
But it may still be advantageous
to use an old technique that was
discussed years ago and is illustrated,
still best illustrated by the
worm demo that's available in
developer examples app kit.
If you're repeatedly drawing the same
string-- with the same layout-- you
need only compute the glyph layout once.
The glyph layout isn't going to change.
And so for that reason and others,
you can get some performance
benefit by assembling your text
objects and hanging onto them.
If you just do a little manual
mucking with the text system,
allocate your text storage object--
text storage is an object that contains
both the characters and the attributes
applied to runs of those characters.
Allocate your own layout manager.
Allocate a text container.
Wire them together and hang onto them.
Keep them around.
And use them.
Every time you need to draw the glyphs,
then all you have to do is message
the layout manager directly.
Say, draw glyphs for glyph range.
And if you play with the worm example,
you'll see that this makes a tremendous
difference when you're rendering,
especially on older
versions of the system,
when you're rendering text repeatedly.
Bezier paths-- not a whole
lot to say about Bezier paths.
But if you're drawing really complicated
Bezier paths-- I'm talking about paths
with hundreds or thousands of elements--
be aware that there are crossing
calculations that have to be done.
And the scaling of the algorithms that
necessarily need to be used to get
the closures right and get everything
right with the Bezier path rendering,
it doesn't scale too well when
you get to very complex paths.
So one thing you can do,
if you don't need to get-- if
you're drawing paths like this
that are very complicated,
if you don't need to get exact,
exact results,
you can split those paths into
segments and render them in sequence.
And it looks like pretty much the same--
it looks like pretty much the same thing,
except you get a big
performance win from doing that.
Also, if you have paths that you're
creating over and over again,
the same path,
drawing it over and over again,
stroking or filling it, keep them around.
And this applies in general to a lot
of different types of graphics objects.
If you create them and hang on to them,
there's a lot more caching that we
can do and that other layers below us,
like Core Graphics, can do to recognize,
oh, yeah,
that's the same thing I saw before.
I just draw that again.
Object allocation, initialization,
deallocation.
There are a couple of interesting things
to be aware of with relation to NSImage.
SetDataRetained,
we have this notion of where an image is
able to reference its data source rather
than actually containing the image data.
If you initialize an NSImage
using either a NIT by referencing
file or a NIT by referencing URL,
you will get an image that, for example,
when it's archived,
instead of archiving itself with all the
image data that it loaded from that file,
it just archives the
reference to the file or URL.
So that creates a very
compact representation.
Some people use it for that purpose so
that they can maintain the reference
rather than just copy the image in.
But be aware that if you're
drawing that image repeatedly
and you are in particular using
it for a specific purpose,
you're going to have to be
very careful about that.
If you're drawing a particular image and
you're in particular changing its size,
this may cause NSImage to go back
to disk or go back to retrieve
the image from the URL every
time that it needs to resize it,
recache it at a new size to draw.
Remember,
NSImage does do some caching in the
background that's transparent to you.
So if you're using a referenced
image and you're resizing a window
and things are chunking along,
this is a thing to look into.
Check whether this setting
is on and be aware of it.
And if you need to resize an image,
try and resize it once and get the
size you want and leave it that way.
There's also this notion
of caching separately.
When you've used NSImages,
if you've ever dumped the debug
description for an NSImage,
you may have seen cached image reps.
And you may have seen these.
And they're part of the public API.
A cached image rep is a representation
of an image that usually is
generated from something else,
some drawing you've captured from a view,
or from resizing an image that
you originally loaded as a bitmap.
A cached image rep is an image that
lives in an offscreen window somewhere,
and that's where the
Windows server is keeping it in
a screen-compatible pixel format,
usually ready to go.
This is sort of an optimization,
keeping these cached images.
Now by default, an image is not cached
separately in its own window.
We have the possibility for NSImages
allowed to cache images together and
to just sort of grow this shared window
or shared windows as it sees fit when
it needs to load additional images.
If you have large transient images
that you're loading using NSImage,
and you load them, and then they go away,
and you're not going to replace
them with another large image,
and you want to avoid the potential
resource usage cost of this cache
window growing and growing and growing,
you may want to set
cached separately to yes,
to force the use of a separate offscreen
window for that particular image.
That image will stand alone in
the offscreen cache that the
Windows server that NSImage uses.
So this is a good strategy
to use for transient images.
So that's issues that generally
pertain to AppKit APIs.
Let's dive in deeper now and
look at things that are more
at the foundation level.
In particular,
we'll look at notifications.
These are venerable and widely used,
and still very powerful and
important mechanism in AppKit.
Ways of accessing collections
and strings are sort of a kind
of collection more efficiently.
Using auto-release and the
memory management mechanisms
that ObjC and Cocoa provide.
The immutability concept
and also techniques for
working with property lists.
So notifications, first of all.
Notifications are a very powerful
and flexible mechanism for
a given object to broadcast,
volunteer information about some
interesting event or potentially
interesting event that's occurred in
it to any number of other observers
that the object isn't aware of.
The observers don't need
to be aware of one another.
They can all register with the
central notification center.
And the notification center mechanism
provides sort of the loose coupling
that allows all these objects to
communicate about a particular topic.
without necessarily
knowing about one another.
As an observer,
you can subscribe for a specific
notification posted by a specific object,
or you can cast wider nets and ask
for all notifications posted by
a given object or all instances
of a particular notification,
regardless of the
object that posted them.
You can also use the distributed
notification mechanism to pass
notifications across process bounds.
This is a very powerful general facility.
It's been in the app
kit since the beginning.
But there are certain performance
issues associated with its use,
particularly abuse.
One thing to be aware of is that
when you post a notification,
there's a cost there,
even if nobody is listening.
Obviously,
we've tried to optimize this to make
it a fast path within the notification
center's dispatch mechanism.
But even if nobody's listening,
there's a certain cost
involved in checking to see
whether anyone is listening.
And this gets to be a problem
in particular if you are
sort of speculatively writing
classes if you're not listening.
But you're writing code maybe
that's going to go in a framework,
once again,
that's sort of intended for general
reuse by potentially unknown clients,
clients you may not know about right now.
You may not know, well,
what sorts of notifications
might they be interested in?
What kinds of changes in me
might they want to know about?
So you get into this problem
of sort of speculative posting.
You tend to err on the side of
caution and post notifications
for all kinds of things,
potentially,
just in case somebody might be
interested in listening for that.
[Transcript missing]
So what can you do if you are going to
use notifications to get around this?
In general, help us help you.
Be selective as much as you can
about what kinds of events you really
need to broadcast to the world.
Be as specific as you can
as an observer when you're
registering for notifications.
If you know the name of the notification
you want and you know the object,
register using a non-nil name and object.
These types of entries in
the dispatch table are,
in general, easier for us to optimize.
You can add yourself as an observer with
nil as the name and just the object.
You can also, remember,
as an alternative to that,
you can add yourself several times as
an observer once for each notification,
depending what version of the system
you're running on that may or may
not be a performance advantage.
So measure to see if that's an issue.
Also, obviously, the notification handler
methods that I mentioned,
the notification handler
they're not necessarily the
same as the notification handler
methods that I mentioned.
that block while they're processing
and don't return control to
the poster until they're done,
obviously make these as
efficient as possible.
And if they don't have to do work
right away and you can defer it,
defer that work.
And as I said,
avoid repeated removal and addition
of observers if you possibly can.
One way around this is to consider
using a longer-lived intermediary
object that keeps track of all of these
transient objects and directly messages
them when it receives the notification.
As an example of this,
let's say we have an originator object
that volunteers some information about
itself by posting a notification.
It posts the notification
to the Notification Center.
And if we do this in a
really simplistic way,
we'll have all these
transient objects here.
They're coming and going.
They're adding themselves as
observers to the Notification Center.
They receive the notifications
directly from the Notification
Center when they are posted.
An alternative to this is to drop a
longer-lived object in the middle there
and have it be the only observer that
is added to the Notification Center.
It's maybe some object that knows
about all of these other transient
objects and can more efficiently
dispatch this information to them by,
say, sending a simple objc
message to each object.
You've got less overhead there
because you've got fewer entries
in the Notification Center dispatch
table at any one time.
And also,
you're not adding and removing them and
churning that table over and over again.
So this is one technique you can
use if you're seeing a lot of
load in the Notification Center.
Consider using intermediate objects.
As an alternative to using notifications,
you may not have considered key value
observing and key value binding.
These are powerful technologies that
were introduced in Panther that basically
enable one object to observe value
changes in an attribute of another
object or bind one of its attributes
to the attributes of another object.
You may not have thought
of these as alternatives,
but really they're just sort
of another way of propagating
changes through your application.
One advantage to this approach is
you don't have to anticipate what
others might be interested in.
You just have to make your accessor
methods key value coding compliant.
There's no performance
penalty for unobserved changes
because you're not posting,
trying to anticipate what
others may be interested in.
There's no overhead involved for
an object whose attributes aren't
observed or for a particular attribute
that isn't observed to change.
So obviously that lifts
the burden from you,
too, of having to figure out what
others might be interested in.
And it facilitates a similarly loose
coupling to what notifications provide.
I'm not saying that notifications
are going away by any means.
They're hardwired into a lot
of what we do in the kit.
We have notifications
that objects advertise.
They'll continue to provide those.
Like NSView provides
view bounds did change,
view frame did change notifications
when its geometry changes.
There are lots of things
that are built on that.
But if you're writing new modern code,
you might want to consider KVO and
KVB as another way to go if notifications
aren't appropriate performance-wise.
Also, obviously,
if your problem is simpler and
you don't have a whole lot of
objects you have to notify,
consider the delegation
pattern that we use throughout
the app kit and foundation.
Just have an object have a delegate
that it passes off a message to.
It's a simple Objective-C message send
to a single receiver with the same cost.
[Transcript missing]
If you have an ordered collection,
and specifically an NSArray,
you can use the objected index method
and get objects range to directly access
the elements much more efficiently than
you might be able to with an enumerator.
And in particular,
if you're doing random access,
this is the only way to really do it.
So if we're iterating through
an array using these methods
instead of using an enumerator,
one thing you want to remember
to do is cache your count.
And in fact, this goes for anything that
any properties of an object
that are invariant over
the course of an iteration.
Move the getting of those
values outside of the iteration,
and you save time.
In other languages
that you may have used,
this may not be as important.
But the Objective-C compiler
is not able to know that,
for example,
if I had written i less than bracket
an array count bracket there,
the compiler would not be able to know.
It would have no way of knowing
that the count is not changing.
It's got to send that message every
time it checks the termination
condition for the for loop.
So keep that in mind.
If there are messages that you
send to get invariant quantities,
cache those instead of using
them each time through the array,
instead of asking for them.
for them each time.
Calling a method through an imp.
I don't know how many of you are
familiar with this technique.
It's been around for a long time.
It should be used with care,
as for one thing, it breaks polymorphism.
It only works when all of the objects
that you are sending the message
to are in general of the same type.
Actually, they really just need to have
the same method implementation.
So usually,
maybe a common base class would
be sufficient for a given message
that you want to send them.
What an imp is,
is an instance method pointer,
a pointer to an implementation
method for a particular message.
You can get that and then use that
as basically a function pointer
to call that method directly.
And this is particularly useful
where you have a whole bunch
of objects of the same type,
and you want to really minimize the
overhead of communicating with them.
Here in this code sample,
we say have a do something useful
with message that we want to send
to all the objects in an array.
First thing we need to do is
get the imp for that message.
And I take the object at index zero
as an arbitrary object in the array.
I'm assuming that this is
a heterogeneous collection,
I mean a homogeneous collection rather,
excuse me.
And these objects are all going
to have the same implementation.
This code will break otherwise.
So I get the imp pointer.
So basically now I've
got the function pointer.
I don't have to go through the
obc dispatch tables for methods.
I just call that function method
directly as if it were a function.
So I get my count of the
objects in the array.
And I'm also here using,
it's not highlighted,
but I'm using the get objects method,
which enables you to retrieve at
once a whole bunch of objects.
In fact, in this case,
all of the objects out of an array.
There's also a get objects variant
that has a range parameter.
That lets you specify a sub range of the
array whose elements you want to get.
So here what we're doing is we're
getting all of the objects out and we're
mallocing a memory block to hold the ids,
the instance pointers for all of
these objects so that we have them
in a standard C array and then we
can access them any way we want.
It's not essential in this case,
but it's something that might be
useful if we wanted to do other
really fast random accesses.
So we get the objects out
and then for each iteration,
all we have to do is call
through the function pointer.
And the important thing here to
note is the first two parameters.
When you send a message to an
object using the usual obc syntax,
the target is specified as the
first thing in the brackets.
And then the selector is
sort of collected together
as the message to send,
the different selector elements if
you have more than one parameter.
These are sort of implicit parameters
to the method implementation
that obc usually hides from you.
So when you do call through an imp,
you have to provide those yourself.
So as the first parameter to
this imp that we're calling,
we provide the object that's
the target of the message.
We provide the selector just in case
the imp wants to check these because
it can ask for it obviously is going to
need self and it might actually check
the command that is being sent to it,
the selector.
So we send those.
And then we provide an argument
here because in this case our
do something useful with needs a
something to do something useful with.
So that was collections in general.
String operations are, in some sense,
sort of a special case.
I mean, a string is really just a
collection of characters,
right?
So a lot of the same
conceptual ideas apply.
In particular,
you want to avoid intensive character by
character access to a string if you can.
Character at index is there if you
just need to grab a character or
two out of a string once in a while.
But it's not really
intended for heavy use.
And again,
this is the kind of thing that the
Objective-C compiler can't really
inline these types of things.
It needs to send the message each time
in order to actually get the character.
So as alternatives,
look at all of the methods
that NSString provides.
It's a big header,
one of the bigger headers we have.
And there are all kinds of useful
methods that can directly access
the internals of the string and
can do more efficient operations
if you're looking for substrings,
doing searches through a string,
and so forth,
or doing mutations to mutable strings.
Try to use the NSString methods
when there's one available.
When you're doing sequential
scanning or parsing through a string,
searching for substrings,
and wanting to keep track of
your position in a scanner,
remember NSScanner provides a whole
bunch of methods for doing that.
And if neither of those
facilities provides what you need,
you might just want to fetch
the characters in blocks.
And you can use the
getCharactersRange method to do that.
Similar thing to what I was
doing with getObjects.
For NSArray,
you can get all of the characters
out as Unicode characters
into a standard C array.
And then you can do
whatever you want with them,
including using C functions and so forth.
Object management and managing
responsibility for objects is a big
part of any object-oriented application,
and Cocoa applications are no different.
We provide a number of
convenience methods,
factory methods,
class methods on various objects
for very quickly and easily,
with very little code,
getting back an auto-released object.
It's important to remember that
these are auto-released by convention
when you use a factory method.
So if I call NSMutableArray array,
I'm getting back an array
that has been auto-released,
so it's been added to the auto-release
pool for the current thread,
and it's going to have to be processed
by that auto-release pool later.
This is a lot more
convenient than writing,
say, NSMutableArray alloc init,
and then remembering to
release the array later.
It's less code, and so it's convenient,
and it's okay to use in
the majority of cases,
unless performance is
really being impacted.
If you have large numbers of
objects or large numbers of objects,
you're going to have to
use a lot of performance.
numbers of iterations
that you're dealing with.
Also remember that there's no need to
auto-release a temporary object that
you're using just within a method body.
It's something you're not
returning back from the method.
You're just creating it,
and you're going to use it temporarily
to do some operation and get rid of it.
That would be a case where you can
alloc init and release instead.
Again, not in every case is
this really necessary.
But if it becomes a significant
fraction of what you're doing,
you might want to consider that.
Keep that in mind.
This is obviously most worthwhile
for objects that are created and
auto-released in large numbers,
and it avoids potential spikes
in memory or resource usage.
Remember,
when an object is auto-released,
all these auto-released objects start to
sort of pile up and stick around because
they're waiting around to be disposed of
when the auto-release pool is cleaned up.
By default, unless you're creating your
own auto-release pools,
that's when your code kind of finishes up
and returns control back to the run loop,
usually after processing a user
input event or something like that.
When you get back to the run loop,
all that stuff gets cleaned up.
But in the interim,
if you're doing a whole lot of
operations and creating a lot of
auto-released objects and maybe a
lot of big auto-released objects,
if you're doing, say,
image processing or image loading,
as I was doing,
you can get spikes in memory usage,
where instantaneously you get
peaks in your usage of memory.
So, for example,
that's the kind of thing that
you would see using ObjectAlloc,
one of the performance tools
that we provide for you,
and it's also a useful debugging tool.
So we have an application here,
and I'll magnify,
where we've gone through a loop
and we've basically allocated
10,000 auto-released strings,
a real simple, trivial example.
We have a current count
of only 1,097 strings,
but at the peak,
we had about 11,000 strings that were
running around in this application,
hanging around,
waiting to be auto-released at
the end of the loop and as we
got back to the main run loop.
So this is what an
auto-release spike looks like.
When you see these long
bars in ObjectAlloc,
you may want to look at what your
auto-release patterns are and
whether there are cases where you
could use additional auto-release
pools to provide cleanup before
memory usage gets out of control.
It's not a big deal if you're
not using a whole lot of memory,
but if you're really using
big chunks of memory,
remember you're sharing the system
with a whole bunch of other processes,
other applications,
and if memory is tight,
you may start swapping and thrashing.
and it becomes a performance issue.
So again,
an application's main thread has
a default auto-release pool that's
provided for you when you auto-release.
You don't have to worry about it.
It just goes to that.
You can bracket operations with
your own auto-release pools,
as we've already seen.
[Transcript missing]
So we're almost done here.
One last thing I want
to point out to you.
We have a binary format
for property lists.
You've all seen the XML format.
Property lists provide a convenient way,
if you have data structures,
data storage that uses dictionaries,
arrays, strings, and all the sort of
standard foundation types,
they provide a convenient
way to serialize those out,
save them out to disk, and so forth.
The XML format is great.
It's human readable.
You can go in and hand edit it.
If your user has
corruption in a document,
they can send it to you,
and you can read it and say, oh,
this is where this went wrong.
But we also have a binary
format that is smaller.
It is faster to read and parse.
It is very easy to specify it when
you're serializing out your data.
It's just another parameter.
And we have a PLUtil command line
tool that you can use to convert back
and forth between binary and XML.
All you have to do is specify the
format to be binary when you're
serializing your property list using
NSPropertyList serialization APIs.
That's it.
And then you get a binary representation
handed back to you instead of
the textual XML representation.
When you're reading back that data,
you don't even have to worry about it.
It doesn't matter.
NSPropertyList serialization
APIs will figure out for you whether
it's being handed some binary
or textual XML property list data.
So if you want,
that information is available to you.
It will tell you, oh,
I opened this document.
It was XML, or this was binary.
But you don't even have to
be concerned with it when
you're reading the files back.
So that's it for Foundation Techniques.
Just some quick conclusions
to help you optimize better.
Know the framework.
That's, I hope,
the take-home lesson today.
And I hope I've provided something
new for everyone with respect to that.
Know the functionality it provides.
Know where there are different ways
to perform a given task that may have
different performance characteristics.
Work with the framework wherever you can.
Where appropriate,
look beyond the framework.
Remember, we have a lot of facilities
available to Cocoa apps,
things like Core Data and QuartzCore
you've heard about at the talk here.
OpenGL is the fast path to the
hardware for rendering not just 3D,
but also 2D.
We have the Accelerate framework
that encapsulates AlteVec-based image
processing and general computation.
And remember,
use the provided performance
tools to measure.
Because if you don't measure,
you don't really know what's going on.
And you may actually waste time
optimizing in areas that you think
a lot of time is being spent in.
But you may be surprised to find that
time is really being spent elsewhere.
And you could spend your
time more productively.
For more info,
we have documentation about performance
in general and drawing performance
in particular that you might want
to look at on the ADC home page.
Matthew Formica is the contact for
any questions that you may have
subsequent to this conference.